---
layout: post
title: "On Rust"
excerpt: Adventures in learning Rust, and how I assumed my way into confusion.
date: "2015-03-03 07:33:31 -0600"
modified: "2015-03-05 06:23:37 -0600" 
tags: [rust]
image: 
  feature: 
comments: true
---
Lately I've been playing around with [Rust](http://rust-lang.org "Rust"), and there are some fantastic things to love about it: it's fast, forces you to think through safety risks up front, and provides some of the best features of functional languages (pattern matching! Closures! Expression-oriented syntax!). Since the best way to learn a language is to use it, I decided to write a simple program to summarize what CPU is in my system via reading `/proc/cpuinfo`.

#### Features

* Read `/proc/cpuinfo` and parse its format
* Summarize the following fields:
	* Vendor
	* Model Name
	* \# of physical cores
	* \# of virtual cores ("threads")
	* MHz
* Output the results in a nice, compact format.
* Use idiomatic Rust and the Rust Standard Library
* Use the daily builds of Rust -- track the compiler
 
#### try! (and facepalm)
Of course, I picked a time when the language is settling down but not 100% stable to jump in to learning it, so the first thing that happened is I let myself get confused by writing the following code in main:
{% highlight rust %}
let f = try!(File::open("/proc/cpuinfo"));
{% endhighlight %}
...which didn't compile. It said:

	<std macros>:5:8: 6:51 error: mismatched types:
	 expected `()`,
		found `core::result::Result<_, _>`
	(expected (),
		found enum `core::result::Result`) [E0308]
	<std macros>:5 return $ crate:: result:: Result:: Err (
	<std macros>:6 $ crate:: error:: FromError:: from_error ( err ) ) } } )
	<std macros>:1:1: 6:57 note: in expansion of try!
	src/main.rs:14:13: 14:47 note: expansion site
	error: aborting due to previous error

I thought this maybe had to do with recent changes in the standard library (which, in hindsight, was silly -- of *course* Rustaceans wouldn't miss something this simple!), so I spent some time bisecting what the expectations were of code in `std::old_io` vs `std::io`, but they were so very similar that it just didn't make sense.

Thankfully, I found [Rust by Example](http://rustbyexample.com "Rust By Example"), which gives runnable examples of all the major features of Rust. Fantastic stuff! There, I saw that using `match {}` was the way to manage possible failures when opening a file:
{% highlight rust %}
    let mut cpuinfo = match File::open("/proc/cpuinfo") {
        Ok(f) => f,
        Err(e) => panic!("{}", e)
    };
{% endhighlight %}
Fair enough, the return type is `ioResult<T>` (which is really a typedef for `Result<T, ioError>`), so you have to destructure it. But it was bugging me that you'd have a `try!` macro that supposedly does that destructuring yet doesn't compile. And how do I interpret that compiler error?

I finally came back to reading the documentation on `try!` [here](http://doc.rust-lang.org/std/old_io/#try! "Try"). Aha! See, my C++/Python/Java roots bit me; I assumed that try! was similar to a `try..catch` expression, but no -- it's really intended to make handling a *series* of operations more elegant -- you still ultimately use a `match` to destructure the `Result<>`. With `try!`, you can group together multiple operations that could return an error into a function that returns the `Result` of the entire *group*; if any of the steps returns `Err`, you early-return and end up in the error branch.

Okay, so what did that compiler error tell me? Well, it told me what it knew: that `main` had no return value defined (thus, `()`), yet my use of `try!` was giving a `Result<>`. Expression-oriented syntax: the value of the last expression in the function is the return value of the function. So boom: I was being dumb.

So -- I learned that Rust has no exceptions, but with a way to group a series of operations and handle failures gracefully. I dig. Certainly avoids the pitfalls of the entire program being a gigantic `try..catch` with a single, generic exception handler!

I also learned that the compiler is way smarter than I am.

I also re-learned what Mr. Eugene Lewis Fordsworthe said: *Assumption is the mother of all mistakes.* 

Next time, I'll actually *do* something with this file I've managed to properly open.
